How was my trip out? As usual,
hectic and hastily planned, we always seem to, even though we have the best
intentions of getting everything together well in advance and very organized and
business-like, we tend not... But if I ask a dumb question or something like
that, just say, oh wait a minute, back We chop all that stuff out. Yeah, it's no
problem. Or if I make a dumb answer. We chop that out too. Okay.
Let's start off with the basic one. When did you get interested or when did
you're interested in art development? I think it developed when I was born. My
father's always worked as a... worked in the space industry or in the missiles
and space industry, So I had that input around me. He had always been reading
science fiction since I was young, so I had the magazines around to look at. And
some of my earliest recollections are of looking at the covers of old amazing
stories, magazines or paperback books. And in fact, some of them influenced me
to a great deal. Before I could even read or write, I remember looking at some
of those covers for hours and absorbing the visual feeling of the paintings.
There were a few that were especially captivating for me. And I remember them to
this day, exactly what the paintings looked like. And I can describe to you the
compositions and some of the colors of the paintings. And it's a funny thing. At
the last World Science Fiction Convention, I was walking down by one of the
dealer's tables in the dealer's room. and I just started going through some of
the paperback books and I saw one of the covers that I remembered from when I
was three years old or whatever. It was interesting to me because I hadn't been
able, in retrospect, to pinpoint the exact time when I started really being
fascinated by science fiction imagery. And this book had been published in 1952
or 1953, so being born in 1950 that pretty much establishes the beginning of
that at around three years old or so. but the fact that it meant so much to me
that I remembered that exact cover until my present age says something about how
I guess it was just a part of me that that kind of imagery was important to me.
But later when I began to read, I became an avid reader of all types of
literature, but especially science fiction and fantasy. And I had an interest in
art, so the two combined, and it seemed natural to me too. to read and try to
draw what I read. And I would come home sometimes from science-fiction movies or
movies that I enjoyed and tried to illustrate scenes that I'd seen in the movie
from memory. And that carried on pretty much right into my college years.
I can continue beyond that point. Because in college, I had been laboring under
the assumption that I had to have a real type of profession. This is largely due
to input from my parents, but I felt that I had to be something professional,
like a lawyer, something respectable, which being an artist isn't.
So I was diverted during my college years into wanting to become a doctor, which
is still a major interest of mine, anatomy and physiology and the sciences in
general were always important to me. But about three quarters of the way through
my college education, I decided to abandon my pre-med training and go full
scale. Well, actually, it wasn't until my last year of college that I decided a
full tilt to go into illustrating or painting, and I graduated with a degree in
painting. If I had taken one more course, I would have had a degree in biology
with an emphasis on anatomy and physiology, human anatomy and physiology. To go
up and attack on that, does that background, or how does that background help
you when you're painting? It helps me a lot in several ways. First of all, in
constructing alien forms by just extrapolating upon comparative biology. I can
develop a life form that's both interesting visually and somewhat convincingly
suited for a particular environment on another planet. There's that. And also,
it helps me in constructing a human form because I did a lot of dissection. and
I know my human anatomy fairly well. Whereas I know a lot of artists who don't,
they know surface anatomy but they can't really construct a person well out of
their imagination without at least the extensive use of photographs and that's
something I try to avoid. I think it shows in an artist's painting when one uses
a photograph to develop the person and then tries to create the rest of the
painting out of one's imagination, you see a real dichotomy between the way the
person's painted and the rest of the painting is painted. If it all comes out of
your mind, then it all looks like one product or whatever. But one of the jobs I
had when I was putting myself through college was working in the anatomy and
physiology labs at the university I went to preparing the cadavers for the
classes. And during that time, I managed to get some work in doing medical
illustrations. All this combined to really give me a good fundamental education
in the way the body is made up. You had some further training going in, are you?
Yes, after college I went to, I wasn't, the teachers told me I was ready for a
professional career, but I didn't know what I wanted to do yet. I mean, I still
didn't, well, I knew what I wanted to do, but I didn't have the confidence
really to throw everything I had into a career in illustration. I didn't know
really where to start. So to get that kind of professional polish, I enrolled in
the Arts Center College of Design in L.A.
Now in Pasadena, they moved after I left. But I only went there for nine months
because I felt that they didn't have much to teach me after I was in there. And
a couple of my teachers advised me just to drop out and go ahead and start
working. So I sent some samples of my work to publishers in New York, and a
couple of them bit. So I threw everything I had into the back of my Volkswagen,
drove out from California to the East Coast to find my fortune. Was one of those
where Donald Wollheim? Yes, Donald Wollheim of DAW Books was very interested in my
work and quite supportive, really, in my early years. Just a bit of a story.
When you got your first cover job, how did that happen? What happened there?
There was a couple of ways that it happened. Excuse me. And I had a portfolio of
items. You know, I came out to the East Coast and sat down and for two weeks,
just painted straight through. I came out with seven pieces in the end of that
time. Excuse me. Hold that for me to cut out. All my cough in the middle.
Anyway, I had a portfolio of pieces. And I went around first to Marvel Comics.
You know, I'm starting low, at least in my opinion at this point. I showed it to
Roy Thomas, who was the editor-in-chief at that time, and he bought three pieces
out of the portfolio. So my first cover assignments weren't really commissioned
from me. They were bought from me because they were already done. Now, it's true
that after he bought those, he required extensive changes in the work, something
that still bothers me to this day. But anyway, that's how that happened. Now,
with Don Wollheim, he saw slides of my work, of course, in California. And later
I went in to see him when I came out to the East Coast, and he gave me a
manuscript for a book, and I took it home, did some sketches for the manuscript
based upon ideas that I thought would make good cover ideas, and he selected one
and gave me the go-ahead, and that became the painting. That's pretty much how I
work on every book cover. Okay, Rob, I understand you're reading a manuscript
now for something. Several. Several. Yeah. Why don't you go through how that
process works for you. What, actually? Pick a specific.
Boy, that's hard. Every book is so different. How about that one? Oh, The White
Dragon, yeah. That's going back a way. That's back in 77 or 78 when I did that.
Let me think. Well, I read the book one time, just read it as a reader, so to
speak. Then I go through it again the second time as an illustrator, making
notes in margins about details of the way people and objects and things look,
making sure that I try to catch all the details so I don't make someone who's
blonde, black-haired, or whatever, because I like to be really true to the story
as much as possible, especially if I'm taking a narrative approach to doing an
illustration. after going through it that second time i'll sit down and start to
develop thumbnail sketches which are just a small drawings um on scrap paper
actually and try to formulate an idea of what i i would like to illustrate from
that book there's usually something in any book no matter how bad or good that
uh will make a good painting it's a matter of digging through it and finding
what interests you and what will motivate you to do a really good job. So I go
through it and try to collate all my different ideas and put it together into a
painting. That is the mysterious part that I can't really describe to you, how
that happens. I guess that's what makes me what I am, is that process there of
distilling what I've read into something that's a visual image that captures
what's in the book. but that process takes a few days to do, and sometimes I get
an instant image. The cover I just did for Robert A. Heinlein's book, Friday, I
had an instantaneous concept of what that cover was going to look like. As soon
as I finished reading the book the first time, I had, I think, a perfectly clear
idea of what Friday looked like, and I knew that the cover to this book had to
be a portrait of this character because the character had such personality
that really the book was written around her personality, I think. And so that
was my approach there. With other books, like The White Dragon, it involved a
much more laborious process because there were so many good scenes to choose
from. It's hard to figure out which one would be the best one for the book and
which one is my favorite.
So it takes a little bit more time. Eventually, I come to somewhere between one
and eight images that I think I like, and if I'm terribly indecisive, I'll send
it to the publisher or to the art editor or whatever who makes that kind of
decision in a particular company. He or she will choose the one that they like
the most and make the decision for me. And then once I'm given the ball, I run
with it and do the final painting, the major painting. And that becomes a book
cover. do you need feedback from the authors yes lots of times in fact with
Friday I got a phone call from Robert A. Heinlein about a couple months after I
turned in the painting to Ballantine Del Rey they sent him a cover proof which is
a first run color tryout of what the cover is going to look like and he called
me up to tell me it was a little flattery I guess he told me it was the best
cover he ever had on a book of his which is is really quite a statement for
someone who's been in the field as long as he has. And to have an author tell me
that I've captured a particular character or scene exactly the way they had it
in mind is probably, for me, the highest praise that an illustrator can get. And
that really had me floating up by the ceiling for a couple weeks to think that
he would bother to call me to tell me that. But sometimes before I do a
painting, I'll correspond with an author or talk to him or her on the phone to
establish certain details. With the white dragon, for example, I talked to Anne
McCaffrey at length about the actual details of the dragons. As she saw the
dragons in her book, whether they had fork tails or tails that ended in a point
or whatever, or a barb or whatever, and what their skin was like and what the
texture was, so that I could try to capture her image of what they looked like.
It's kind of silly for someone who's an illustrator to try to make all that up
when you can contact the author and get the details, if they're not in the book,
straight from the person who thought them up. When you did A Friday, weren't you
working in a new medium airbrush? Oh, no. I've been using the airbrush since
1975. The difference lately is that I'm using it a bit more than I was in the
past. Now, in Friday, there is no airbrush work in the foreground, in the
figure. that's all done with washes to create that smooth skin tone. And I
deliberately went about doing that painting with the idea of giving a real
photographic quality to what you're seeing so that you could reach out and touch
her, so to speak. Which is also a very important part of that character. The
background, though, is composed of a lot of airbrush work. And I usually keep my
airbrush work to the background because I don't want it to dominate a painting.
I hate to work an airbrush, frankly, because it's so tedious and I'm so clumsy
that I often spill things on me while mixing up color into little bottles and
all that. So the only airbrush I have is the crudest model made by the Pache
Airbrush Company, and that forces me to keep it to the background, pretty much.
I like to use it sometimes as a sketching tool. an airbrush wall develops soft
masses of color in certain areas that have no hard edges so you can paint in and
out of those areas without creating distracting I don't know what the word would
be, I call it background noise but distracting hard edges underneath what you're
painting on top I think it will be some time to come before I actually bring my
airbrush work right up to the foreground and make a painting that's completely
airbrush My cover for Arthur C. Clarke's book, 2010, approaches that. There is a
lot of airbrush work in the foreground there. But that was such a simple
composition that it pretty much required that, I think.
What about using oils and acrylics? I know you prefer acrylics. Well, I prefer
acrylics for illustration because they dry so quickly. That's the only reason,
really. Well, there's two reasons, actually, why I like to use acrylics. They
dry so quickly, and it's the main reason, and that's the reason why I first
started using them. My training had all been in oils and watercolors, and a lot
of my early illustrations were in those two media, but I found myself often
working at 3 o'clock in the morning before the day, or the morning of the day
that I had to turn a painting in, and I couldn't bring a painting in wet, so I'd
have to make so much drier in with the painting. and there's a substance called
cobalt dryer that if you put too much in the paint, it seriously affects the
longevity of the painting. In fact, I have a painting I did in late 1974 that
has now cracked up a lot in oil painting because I had to rush it dry that way.
And so my feeling is if I can't paint an oil painting right so that it will last
and be a good investment to someone who may buy it, then I'd rather not use that
medium at all unless I have the time to be able to develop it in the correct
process so that it'll last for posterity. So I use acrylics and it certainly is
easier for me. I can paint right up to two minutes before the messenger comes to
pick up my painting and take it to the publisher and put in that last little
highlight or whatever and not have to worry about it being wet or being damaged
on root. Some people say acrylics don't have the depth that oils have, but I had
to notice the acrylic paints. Oh, it depends on how you use them. Yeah, I see a
lot of flat acrylic paintings, frankly.
And that's just, I had to teach myself how to use them. And I think my
background in oils dictated that I try to duplicate some of the feeling that you
get in oil paintings with acrylics. And maybe because I approach it from that
aspect, I attempted to do that, to get that feeling in depth with my acrylic set
and other people who have just had a training in acrylics only don't try to do
that because they feel limited by that. The fast drying time is also a liability
with acrylics. It's very hard to blend large areas of color, and that's why I
often resort to the airbrush. I can do it with watches if I have to, but it
takes a lot longer. I did a painting for a book by Clifford Simak called City.
There's a big blue sky in the background, and it took me 32 washes of color to
get just the right gradations of blues in the background. That took me about a
day and a half or two days to do. Now, with an airbrush, I probably could have
gotten exactly the same effect in a half an hour. So, you know, when you're
working a 100-hour week or an 80-hour week like I do, you know, a half an hour
can make a big difference in a painting. So I don't... I'm like... Wait a
minute, let me say... I don't work 80 or 100-hour weeks all the time, but I
often do. It seems like most of the last year I did. That half an hour or two
days worth of time makes a big difference. I resort to the airbrush just because
it is a good time-saving tool, and I can duplicate the same effects.
I like oil paints a lot, and I want to get back into using them just because it
has a whole historical, romantic feeling to it. It's really something that's
hard to describe to someone who's a non-artist, but the smell of turpentine in a
studio and everything has a certain sense of nostalgia and romance to it. It is
an entirely enjoyable experience to paint in oils. It's a whole different thing
from working in acrylics. I would like to go back into painting with oils. I
just have to give myself the time to do so. There is a problem I have with oils
which is the second reason why I use acrylics and that's that I develop skin
problems when I get turpentine in contact with my skin, I seem to be allergic to
it. So I sometimes have to use gloves or whatever when I'm painting with oils,
and that makes it a less enjoyable experience. I like to have the feeling of
actually holding the brush without the barrier of this rubber in between my hand
and the brush. So that may be a reason why I haven't gotten back into painting
oils.
I felt I felt really good about it but a little ambivalent I felt I felt like it
came a year too late because year before I done the White Dragon I had done the
entire John Carter of Mars series. I felt it was the pinnacle of my work at that
time, and that's when I felt I really deserved to get it. A year after that, I
still hadn't felt that I had bettered the work I'd done the year before, so I
didn't feel, you know, this often happens with Academy Awards, for example, that
there'll be three excellent movies that deserve to get best picture but the
award can only go to one so they'll give it to one and uh they'll give an award
to the same director or something three years down the pike for a lesser effort
but it's partially in in acknowledgement of what the the person did before that
they didn't get the
i've gotten what two or three more since then so um now it's uh you know it's
easy for me to be blase about it, and say, well, it's just an award, and it's
great, but it doesn't pay the rent, and it doesn't do a thing for my income, or
whatever, but I'm not sure I would enjoy not getting one either, so I'm not
going to say. Other artists will ask me, well, how does it feel to win another
Hugo, or whatever, and I'll go, well, it's all right, or it's nice, but again,
it's easy for me to say that because I'm winning them, if I didn't win it it
would probably really bug me because I'm a competitive person there are times
when I'm sitting down and I think wow there's X number of thousand people that
voted for me as the best artist that's really something that there's that many
people that enjoy my work that much actually put my name down as the best artist
that they can think of that's really something that really gives me a boost
sometimes But you can imagine.
Here's a real art question. And I'm sure you ran into this. I have several
friends. Fantasy and space art. And they went on to get formal training in the
arts. And they draw what was required in class. But when they went through what
they wanted to draw, the instructors got a little strange. Did you run into
that? you run into it all the time it's getting worse if not better I mean it's
it's getting worse if it's not the same there's only one school I'm an art
school I can think of that has opened up their attitudes towards that since um
you know since say 1972 now there could very well be others but I know the Paris
School of Art in in Connecticut has changed their attitudes a little bit as a
result of Don Mates who is one of their major graduates and who is a Hugo
nominee now they have a little bit more of a tolerant attitude towards science
fiction or fantasy art. Unfortunately you'll find a snobby attitude towards
fantasy and science fiction art among the public in general it's just nearly
impossible for anyone who does the type of work I do to get into galleries to
get any kind of critical recognition at all. And it's only in the last few years
that it's starting to show any hope. Unfortunately, the art schools, as usual,
are years behind the real world. And even if they started showing fantasy and
science fiction work in major museums and galleries on a regular basis, it's
going to be a long time until the art schools, I think, catch up and start
showing a better attitude towards it. But this is something I ran into. that's
one of the reasons why I dropped out so quickly from ArtCenter there's an
instance where that I can relate, there was a class I had, a figure drawing
class and the teacher was late, hadn't come in yet and the model was just
standing there and I had my drawing pad in front of me and the model was dressed
up in an 1890s type of get up and he had a bicycle pump that was his prop and he
was just standing there in this ridiculous pose that I had no interest in I
couldn't see any reason why I should have to draw that I knew that I could draw
it if I wanted to. You know, I graduated already with a BA degree in painting at
San Jose State University. I'm capable. I could draw that figure without having
the figure in front of me. It was no problem. And so I just ignored him standing
there and started drawing this picture of a giant, well, he was a big, bald
giant standing on a mountaintop, a very heroic type of pose. The teacher came
in, looked over my shoulder and said, What is that? And then proceeded to scold
me and give me all kinds of verbal abuse about refusing to draw what was in
front of me. And I just packed up my things and said, that's it. What am I here
for? This is ridiculous. I'm not being taught anything. By being forced to draw
something that I have no interest in, that I could learn nothing from. So, you
know, you find this in art schools all the time. And there's also the situation
where you have instructors who don't know how to teach how to draw realistic
art. One thing that I see all the time, I have art students corresponding with
me. Art students have come to conventions to see me and talk to me. Where can I
go to find out how to draw a person? Where can I go to find out how to render
something the way it looks in real life? because all they're getting are classes
in abstract painting, how to express your feelings. You can't express your
feelings unless you have a vocabulary. And if you've got to learn the
vocabulary, the fundamentals, first. If you decide to cast those aside, then
fine. But first, you've got to have a grounding in the academic training. After
all, even Picasso did that. He was an incredible academy painter. He could
render human figures with remarkable verity. first, but then he decided to go
into more abstract expression. Fine. But you've got to have that grounding
first. I don't think, well, anyway, this is a pet peeve of mine. I see this
happening time and time again where a school will graduate a number of students
who are unable to make a living commercially as an artist, either doing
portraits or commissions or in the commercial field because they're simply not
skilled and don't have the mental makeup to be able to do it so they end up
being teachers. And what do they teach? The same thing that they paint. And so
it's just a self-promoting system and it gets worse and worse and worse as the
years go on. You get more and more incompetent people. And they graduate people
who can't make a living out in the real world, quote, unquote, and they go back
and teach as a way of living and they teach more incompetent people. And the
poor students are the ones who are suffering because they go to a school
trusting the school to teach them what they need to know to be able to paint
properly or express what they want to express, and they're not getting the
education. I had a strong feeling that you knew you were in engineering. Yes, I
had been. And I waited two and a half years at San Jose State University until I
finally started getting classes from what I consider to be decent instructors. I
don't know why schools don't require their art teachers to have portfolios
available for viewing by students before they sign up for the class. You can
tell by looking at a teacher's portfolio what the teacher's attitude is. In
fact, even if there's a little resume, that would help too. What the teacher's
attitude is towards art, what the teacher's viewpoints are, you know, etc. Then
you could pick an instructor who has the possibility of teaching you what you
want to learn. but it's ridiculous if you want to be a nature painter, for
example, and paint natural, paint animals and whatever in a realistic manner.
Take a class from someone who teaches abstract expressionism. It's useless. It's
a waste of money. It's a waste of time. Absolutely pointless. Good art is, well,
I can get in my whole spiel about abstract art anyway. There is no such thing as
abstract. I mean, good art that is not good abstract art to begin with. that's a
whole point by Whistler's mother it's an abstract painting the actual name or
title of that painting is an arrangement in blacks and grays is the actual title
of the painting and every good painting is a good abstract painting it's just
that someone who works realistically or works in a way that gives you a feeling
that he's painting reality is taking it one step beyond the abstract. Whereas an
abstract painter will leave it at that point and not carry it any further.
Let's... Would you give me... Sure. Sure. I'm sorry. I'm getting... No problem
there. I'll climb off my soapbox here for a second.
What? Aside from fantasy in general, what are your favorite subjects? If you're
not painting a cover... I think one thing that you can say about my work is I
try to cover all the all the fields and that's because it's all I don't have any
any particular favorite I've I think I could say I have a favorite assignment
each year there's an there's one assignment I get every year that is the one I
look forward to it's a it's a regular thing now with Dawe books and that's the
year's best horror stories cover it's a collection of horror stories supposedly
the year's best and um I have completely free rain like I often do with book
covers but especially with this one and that's enjoyable to me. I like doing a
good horror painting once in a while. I'm not a person who's interested at all
in blood and guts. That's not necessarily what I I equate that more with
revulsion than I do with horror. There's a difference but that is a lot of fun
and I've enjoyed doing that cover every year that painting I should say. I've
come up with a few pretty scary ideas that that's never let me paint someday
that I'll do just for myself. But, you know, that's only one aspect. I like, of
course, the other aspects of science fiction and fantasy also. I like to paint.
I like the exploration of space, what they call hardware paintings with
spaceships and all that. That's a lot of fun. I like to just kind of keep my
fingers in all of it. So I can't really say I have a, especially having a
favorite, you know, field. Or as one of them and that particular job is probably
my favorite assignment out of the year but I can't say it's doing horror is
something I like to do over doing other things per se
question from one of the other guys um how much does a cover affect the
saleability or popularity of the book do you get any feedback on that well can I
cover full of books? I honestly don't know. I really don't know. Sometimes I
think it makes a big difference, other times I don't. The fact that my career
has gone where it has and that
sometimes I think it makes a big difference. The fact that I'm getting paid what
I do and everything to do these covers and that the publishers seem to think
that my work sells books
over just the title and the name of the author makes me think sometimes that the
artwork has a lot to do with it. There are other times when you'll see a
bestseller that has an absolutely wretched cover or has nothing but type on it
that's selling quite well then you think the cover art has absolutely nothing to
do with it. So it's really hard to say. It's a balance I think between how
famous the author is how much publicity the book has gotten and the expectations
that people have had before the book's been published. A book like Foundation's
Edge, the Foundation series by Isaac Asimov has a large readership. They've been
waiting for this book, and it's come out. They could have put a black cover with
just the title Foundation's Edge on it, and that thing would have sold off the
shelf. but just to be sure they've hired me to do the paperback cover for that
book, but, you know,
books that have large, very large, that are published in large publications have
large budgets, and so they can afford to have a good cover for that, and I think
that's why it's true as, what's his name? The founder of Dell. His last name was
Dell Acord. I don't remember his first name. Anyway, he said, what you do is
when you have a good painter, good cover artist, is use them for your best books
or your worst books. That way you cover both your bases. But he especially
accented the idea of using your best cover artist for your worst books because
then at least you minimize your losses. Everything on top of that is gravy. and
so I don't know I asked one publisher if that was true and she said yes we'll
put you on our worst books and on our best books and if you can't tell the
difference that's fine with us but if you can that's her attitude and I guess
that's good because that way I get to read some good ones lately they've all
been really great books I haven't had any clinkers I've heard before in the
interview You put it, whether, let's say an editor's in there and they're
reading this, and you're like, oh boy, you've got to buy this from this guy
because you said we would, and now we're stuck with it. Get Walen in here and
have him discover. Yeah, that's happened many times, and in fact I don't want to
name names, so I can't. I won't on this particular instance because the writer
is someone that I really like, and most of the work that this writer has done is
excellent. But this particular piece was a real loser. Yeah, I shouldn't have
said what I said just a minute ago, that I haven't had many clinkers lately.
This was a real clinker, and I did the cover within the last three months, and
the painting was not one of my best. I'm proud of it, but I wouldn't put it up
there with the White Dragon. I'll put it that way. And I think my attitude
towards doing the cover was directly derived from the lack of quality in the
book and my disappointment with the book, and that does happen sometimes,
unfortunately, in spite of myself. In your opinion, is science fiction and
fantasy art getting better, staying the same? Oh, it's definitely getting
better, getting better all the time, and despite my gloomy feelings about art
schools and all that, the recognition for science fiction and fantasy art is
starting to swing upwards. I've had one-man shows in a few museums, and I've
been part of group shows in some museums up north and in the east. And there's
talk now among people in the Smithsonian, among other institutions, of having
major science fiction-oriented art shows. If this starts happening and we get
this much-needed critical appraisal, which is the main problem with science
fiction art, so that there is no critiquing being done of it. Then I think we'll
start to get some recognition. We'll get more critiques. Then we'll get
investors interested in it and the prices will come up and it will reach a level
of respectability comparable with, say, Western art. Right now, old fantasy art,
the work of Maxwell Parish, Arthur Rackham, people like that, is fairly highly
respected and commands decent prices, I would imagine, but new work is done at
the bottom of the scale, and it's going to take some time. The same thing was
true of science fiction literature. It was always in the ghetto, so to speak, as
the writers often would say. What's out of the ghetto now? The literature is a
commanding force on the bestseller list. The New York Times bestseller list has
over half the items are now so-called genre items either horror science fiction
or fantasy books commanding the bestseller list it's out of the ghetto now it's
getting critical appraisal and and some recognition as an art form in in the
literature field it's time now for the art to do the same thing and and i don't
think it'll be much longer till it does it'll just require some uh extraordinary
efforts on the part of the artist to get to go out and publicize it to show it
to the public I have to say, whenever I've had a one-man show or been part of a
group show of science fiction and fantasy records, we have not had a show yet in
a museum or gallery that has not broken all attendance records for previous
shows in that gallery. It happened at the New Britain Museum of Art. It happened
in the Canton, Ohio Museum of Art. It happened in the Butler Museum of Art. They
put in a science fiction or fantasy show and it broke all attendance records for
that particular museum. So there's an incredible support for this type of art
among the general public. It's just going to take the snob some time to realize
that and to realize that there is some good art in there worthy of notice and
critical appraisal. It's all tied together. Until the critics deign to look and
say some of this is good art and start spelling out what is good and what isn't,
then it's not going to be considered seriously by the people who invest in the
art.
I've got to say that that is something that I'm really disappointed in is that
there doesn't seem to be a whole lot of
we need people to who are willing to put their reputations on the line and say
this art is good and this person's art is not good
you know being a self supported group of people in science fiction and the
fantasy community. Everyone is mutually supportive and everyone tries to be
democratic, but that's not the way the real world works.
if you have an art show that has several excellent pieces of work in it and
several bad things that the majority of people are going to look at and say,
that's terrible. What's that doing in this show? People aren't going to take it
very seriously because they're going to feel that But science fiction art is
basically anything that's weird or grotesque and that there's no standards for
quality in the field. There are some people attempting to form an academy of
science fiction and fantasy art, and this may help a lot in establishing a basis
for standards. Well, not standards. I'm not trying to get that across. A basis
for quality. You know, for example, good rendering, you know, and basic things
that make a piece of art good. There's not quite a place to come from it. Very
little. I mean, what we have is, let's look at the Western artists. You know,
the Western art has a heritage, a heritage going back to Remington and other
artists from back then. it's got a standard of quality a benchmark with
Remington and other artists for people to aspire to or to try to better even if
their styles are more modern or whatever it does have that what does science
fiction and fantasy art have well it's got the art of the pulps from the 30s and
that's about it most of that art was real dreck let's face it when people look
at it even among the general public it's considered pretty terrible art and a
lot of it was some of it was excellent there was some excellent art from back
then also but there was a lot of terrible work and there have even been books
published of the art of the pulps and everything and this is what people see in
the bookstores and they think science fiction art they think of the old you know
the women in the brass brassiere fighting the tentacled monster you know in the
cliche situations and with a bubble helmet and everything hopefully Star Wars
and some of the new movies have been out in the last 10 years. We'll start to
change that image and if people become more aware of the art on the books also,
that'll change also. But we're still fighting to overcome the bad taste left
over from the art of the 30s and 40s. The pull part. Have you had any inquiries
into doing production design like Ralph McQuarrie? Yes. Yes, I've even got an
agent now in Hollywood who's fielding those for me. I've had a few real weirdos
come up to me with these great movie proposals, and I've wasted so much time
dealing with these people that I've had to finally get an agent to handle some
of those. I am working on a movie project now that may develop into a full-scale
production. I don't know. We'll see. that I can't talk about, is what I'm
getting into. I've signed a paper to the effect that I can't reveal any of the
information about the movie until they choose to do so in a publicity release.
What are you working on that you can't do? Cover. Oh, that I can talk about? I
just finished the cover for Foundation's Edge for Isik Asimov. There's a new
dragon book by Anne McCaffrey that I'll start reading soon. I've got another
Year's Best Horror Stories cover to do next month, or this month actually. April
anyway. What month are we in here?
There are so many things going on. It's really hard for me to remember them all.
There's the Final Fuzzy Manuscript by H.P. Lovecraft, I was going to say. H.P.
and Piper. I am wrapping up a children's book, my first children's book. So
that's a collaboration with another artist named David Wenzel, and it should be
a real nice book. And let me think, we're doing...
I'll tell you the truth. I've got a stack of manuscripts in my studio that's
probably five feet high. And they come in, and I say, well, that looks like a
fun one to do. And yeah, I can fit in my schedule, and then I put it in the pile
and forget about it until I get done with the painting before that one is due
and pick up the manuscript and say, oh yeah, this one. So I've forgotten what a
lot of my projects are. I've not booked as much as a year in advance at any
particular time and that certainly is the situation now. So I remember, there's
some of them that I remember and those are the ongoing projects and the Dragon
one because I've got a special interest in Emma Caffrey's work. but that's
all I can think of off the top of my head.
How many projects do you have going at one time, paintings with? Well, I usually
like to keep it to just one. I hate to divide my interests between one painting
and another project. I go to great lengths to maintain a mood throughout a
painting. I did a painting that took place on a sandy planet, for example, it
was all desert. and I recorded a six hour tape of all wind noises and like wind
in a desert and I just played that while I was painting the painting because I
wanted to keep in the mood and the feeling of that that book and that that
painting so I hate I'd hate to be in the middle of that planet and that scene
and trying to develop that this environment and then have to break it and do a
painting of something horrible or whatever. But sometimes I'm forced to. And
it's happened a couple times. But I'm usually good enough at juggling my
schedule around so I don't have to. It is very beneficial sometimes to have a
break after doing all the sketches. I've sent the sketches in to the publisher
and they're looking those over for me to do another project because when the
sketches come back to me, I see them with a fresh eye. And even though the
publisher may have picked one particular one I may find a different one that I
think it really is better for the book after all and I'll throw the other ones
aside I'll talk it over to the publisher and we'll figure out a way to
compromise on them or something or they'll let me go ahead and do the one I want
to do
but that is good to have a break between doing going through all the analyzing
the collating and excuse me and doing the sketches and and before doing the
final painting is could have a break in there but while I'm actually doing that
the big painting the big rendering I hate hate to have to break that and do
another one it's really that's one of the reasons why I have a strong dislike
for advertising work advertising work always involves having to do extra work on
a painting you know you do a piece it's the only time that ever happens to me
never happens to me with paperback covers I get something sent back to me for
changes but I'll do an advertising job and because well advertising jobs are
almost always judged by committee you know men in the advertising company and
someone always has to come up with an idea that makes it sound like he's worth
being hired to work in this company so if a piece of artwork gets passed around
for a particular client they'll look at it and say well I think this and
everyone's got to have an idea you know and some of the ideas are the most
stupid things I've ever heard in my life I'll tell you working for advertising
companies are really something and And they'll think of anything to have some
input in this particular committee meeting about my piece of work or any
artist's piece of work. I don't know any artist that doesn't have things sent
back from advertising agencies and stuff on a regular basis. And so I'll be
working. I will finish the painting, send it into an ad company or whatever. And
I'll be on the next one. And then this thing will come back to me because I want
changes here or brighten up this or take this out or whatever. Then I'll have to
stop and work on that other one. make the changes and send that back in and then
I can go back to the painting I was working on and I hate that so much, that's
why I avoid doing a lot of advertising jobs I mean I charge them for the extra
work and all that and that type that kind of discourages them from sending it
back to me but a lot of times it doesn't Let's get into Glass Onion Graphics a
little bit why did you decide to open that up?
it was a gradual process I'd always wanted to make prints of my work available
most of my work sells for pretty high prices fans simply can't afford it when I
go to a convention I like to have something they can afford to buy the way
around that is by doing prints and posters of my work Glassning Graphics was
created to fill that need Now, my wife has helped me out a lot by doing my
bookkeeping, for example, and other things. She stopped doing what she was doing
in order to help me out in my business to a certain extent. And Glass-Siner
Graphics was kind of an extension of that. I said, if you want to go ahead and
make a print of my work, I'd be really happy. You can take all the profit and
everything. Just, you know, as long as we have print available for fans to buy
or whatever. And she's turned it into a full-scale business. Now, she's still
busy. She's on that phone. She's doing my bookkeeping and all this other stuff
that we originally were going to  she was going to do. We've had to hire extra
people. We have a secretary and whatever. But now it's going into a full-scale
business.